Last week, a large group of striking factory workers, United Electrical Workers union officials and community members gathered in the freezing temperatures in Wilmerding, Pa., across the railroad tracks from the Wabtec Corporation, holding signs denouncing corporate greed and announcing support for the union. As a train passed by, it blew its whistle repeatedly in support of the protest.

Strikes have made a resurgence in the past year, with more workers striking in 2018 than at any time in over 30 years. But most of these workers were teachers and health care professionals. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, which collects data on all work stoppages involving 1,000 or more workers, the strike in Wilmerding, near Pittsburgh, was the largest manufacturing strike of the Trump presidency. It was in support of 1,700 union workers at a 100-year-old locomotive factory in Erie who went on strike a week earlier, when Wabtec acquired the factory from General Electric and immediately demanded severe concessions from the workers. Bringing back “good paying” manufacturing jobs in the Midwest was a linchpin of President Trump’s 2016 campaign and is already a talking point of the 2020 election.

The fight between the Erie workers and Wabtec shows that despite our collective popular imagination about American manufacturing jobs, the current reality and the future of a promise of “good-paying work” are quite different.

The strike is making the argument that if wages are drastically cut, the blow will be not only to Erie but to the future of manufacturing in America. Without strong unions and the decent wages they fight for, factories will not be able to find the millions of skilled workers they need to maintain the momentum of the American manufacturing resurgence.

Wabtec is willing to keep the existing workers at the current average of $35 per hour — a modest income that would allow someone to support a family — but wants to create a second pay tier for new workers, with wages of $16.75 to $25 per hour. That two-tier trend has led the average production worker to now earn less than the average American worker (right where Wabtec hopes to put its future Erie work force). Manufacturing wages have grown at just 1.4 percent per year, nearly half the rate of an average American worker, and less than the cost of living. While manufacturing workers, many of whom don’t have four-year college degrees, still earn 13 percent more than they would at a job in, for example, the retail sector, that wage premium has eroded since the 1980s by one-fourth.
These wage cuts and two-tier contracts were common after the Great Recession in 2007, but we are in the midst of strong economic growth. Wabtec made $256 million profit through the third quarter of 2018, and its chief executive and a handful of top executives are receiving almost $60 million in salary. The company’s position is that it is demanding lower wages because it can, a fact that was evident in a Wabtec spokeswoman’s explanation that the company’s current pay scale “is exceptional for that region.” It is perhaps no coincidence that when the merger is complete, the C.E.O. will get a roughly $16 million bonus — almost the exact amount of the likely impact of the proposed wage reductions for the workers.
By proposing to lower future workers’ pay, companies like Wabtec may halt a broader manufacturing resurgence. Deloitte just predicted that manufacturing companies may be short 2.4 million skilled workers over the next 10 years, in large part because nearly 2.7 million retirements are expected in one of the nation’s oldest work forces.
When it comes to young people, manufacturers already have to overcome an outdated idea that today’s factories, which are actually high-tech, remain dirty and dangerous. It’s hard to imagine industrial companies recruiting a new generation into manufacturing at the pedestrian and downward-trending pay sought by Wabtec. Unable to consistently recruit workers to the industry because of low pay, factories now rely on temporary staffing agencies to recruit workers for less-skilled front-line jobs and hold on to their most skilled workers well into their 60s.
It’s a formula that won’t work much longer. The unions are offering Wabtec and the rest of manufacturing a different and more promising path: Rebuild the wage premium in manufacturing as a way to retain and attract the next generation of skilled manufacturing workers.
In fact, after threatening multiple times to close the Erie facility and move remaining work to Texas, the growing freight train business has spurred enough orders at Wabtec that executives are demanding mandatory overtime from the union. What Wabtec and similar companies need to realize is that, in the past decade, the economics of manufacturing have changed. Workers are in a position to demand a greater share of a company’s success. Employment in the industry has surged, adding more jobs in 2018 than in any year in the previous three decades. Major manufacturers like Caterpillar have earned record profits, and companies have brought back to the United States a record 300,000 manufacturing jobs from overseas in the past two years, after realizing hidden costs of transportation and poor quality.
America’s competitive advantage in manufacturing — compared with low-wage nations like Mexico and in Asia — lies in highly value added and increasingly high-tech manufacturing like transportation equipment (i.e., planes, trains and automobiles). These jobs pay among the best ($62,400) in the sector and have grown by 32 percent since 2010. In contrast, nondurable manufacturing, like food, textile and paper manufacturing, is growing the slowest (just 7 percent since 2010) and pays far less ($43,500 per year).
Soon after the Wilmerding rally, the union announced that it had reached a short-term agreement with the company, where the workers would return to work under the old contract for 90 days. This was a win for workers, but it may be just a short-term reprieve.
The test will be whether the workers can preserve good-paying jobs for the next generation. Antwon Gibson, the president of the U.E. Local 610 in Wilmerding and a Wabtec maintenance technician, said that the last time the union had a wage strike at G.E. was almost 50 years ago. That strike, and similar ones in the 1930s, were the foundation for decades of well-paid jobs and highly productive manufacturing — the kind that we hope for in 21st-century manufacturing.